SOURCE: https://www.supremecourt.ohio.gov/
============================================================
The Supreme Court of Ohio & The Ohio Judicial System America commemorated its 250th birthday on July 4, 2026, marking a historic milestone in the nation's journey. To honor the semiquincentennial, the Court hosted a year-long celebration titled "The Story of America," highlighting significant historical events that shaped both the nation and Ohio. In addition to digital content, the initiative features special events and exhibits at the Court. The celebration aims to spark curiosity, strengthen civic literacy, and recognize pivotal moments in American and Ohio history. Learn More. America 250: Ohio Courts Survey Chief Justice Sharon L. Kennedy delivered the Annual State of the Judiciary Address - Watch Here The Supreme Court of Ohio welcomed five new interns from Cristo Rey Columbus High School this academic year. They will be assisting various Court offices with special projects. Students in the Ohio State University Moritz College of Law's Master of Laws (LLM) program visited the Supreme Court of Ohio. Learn more. Learn more about the Chief Justice and Justices Thomson Reuters Data Information 360 Virtual Tour of Thomas J. Moyer Ohio Judicial Center Supreme Court of Ohio Writing Manual Case Inquiry Form Marsy's Law & Crime Victim Rights Reporting to Law Enforcement & Compliance Plan Guidance Resources for the Bench Statistical Reporting Including Case Time Guidelines View Archive Opinion Search Docket Search September 29, 2026 In State ex rel. Sommers Dev. Group, L.L.C. v. Cuyahoga Cty. Bd of Elections, the Court ordered the parties to file responses, if they choose to, by 4 p.m., Wednesday, Sept. 30, to the motion to intervene as respondents submitted by Robert Agresta, Diane Agresta, Iwona Tietz-Golczak, Marcin Golczak, and Elvera Ranallo. View Third Complete Announcement State ex rel. Ellis v. Dept. of Rehab. & Corr. Slip Opinion No. 2026-Ohio-3769 State v. Bradley Summary Slip Opinion No. 2026-Ohio-3771 In Disciplinary Counsel v. Tyler, the Court suspended Charles Tyler Sr. of Akron from the practice of law for one year, with six months stayed with conditions. View Complete Announcement In State v. Bradley, the Court upheld the conviction of a Belmont County man who struck a neighbor’s home with a stray bullet while he was shooting at another man. View Second Complete Announcement September 28, 2026 The Court dismissed Borovicanin v. Natl. Collegiate Athletic Assn. View Complete Announcement September 25, 2026 In State ex rel. Duckett v. Hancock Cty. Bd. of Elections, the Court issued a revised slip opinion to reflect a vote change. View Second Complete Announcement In In re Resignation of Adelstein, the Court accepted the resignation of Carol Adelstein of Cleveland Heights with disciplinary action pending. View Complete Announcement September 24, 2026 State ex rel. Duckett v. Hancock Cty. Bd. of Elections Slip Opinion No. 2026-Ohio-3747 In State ex rel. Duckett v. Hancock Cty. Bd. of Elections, the Court granted a writ of mandamus. View Complete Announcement September 23, 2026 In Borovicanin v. Natl. Collegiate Athletic Assn., the Court denied the appellant’s emergency motion to vacate the appellate court stay of the case, and to restore the trial court’s preliminary injunction. View Third Complete Announcement In State ex rel. Jones v. Pittman, the Court ordered the relator to file a response, if she chooses, by Friday, Sept. 25, to the respondent’s motion to dismiss the case or, in the alternative, for a judgment on the pleadings. View Second Complete Announcement State ex rel. Bradford v. Bur. of Sentence Computation Slip Opinion No. 2026-Ohio-3661 In State v. Bryant, the Court appointed the Office of the Ohio Public Defender to represent the appellee. View Complete Announcement September 22, 2026 In State ex rel. Derrig v. LaRose, the Court permitted Ninth District Court of Appeals Judge Nathan H. Manning to intervene as a respondent, and directed him to file his evidence and merit brief no later than 4 p.m., Thursday, Sept. 24. View Third Complete Announcement In State ex rel. Koebel v. Erie Cty. Bd. of Elections, the Court permitted Caleb Stidham to intervene as a respondent and directed him to file his evidence and merit brief no later than 4 p.m., Thursday, Sept. 24. View Second Complete Announcement Perrigo Sales Corp. v. Harris Summary Slip Opinion No. 2026-Ohio-3648 In Perrigo Sales Corp. v. Harris, the Court ruled that a generic drugmaker paid the appropriate amount of Ohio commercial activity tax based on the amount distributors actually paid for the drugs rather than the typically higher list prices. View Complete Announcement September 18, 2026 State ex rel. Kidd v. Clinton Cty. Bd. of Elections Summary Slip Opinion No. 2026-Ohio-3663 In State ex rel. Kidd v. Clinton Cty. Bd. of Elections, the Court ruled that a citizen initiative to add data center regulations to the city of Wilmington’s zoning code cannot appear on the Nov. 3 general election. View Third Complete Announcement In State ex rel. Koebel v. Erie Cty. Bd. of Elections, the Court ordered the respondents to file an answer to the relator’s amended complaint by Friday, Sept. 18. View Second Complete Announcement The Supreme Court has released the following case announcement. View Complete Announcement Local Rules of Court Ohio Constitution Ohio Revised Code Ohio Administrative Code Ohio Rules of Court Proposed Rule Amendments U.S. Constitution Civic Education & Tours Educator Resources Continuing Legal Education for Lawyers Judicial College & OhioCourtEDU Law Library Guardians ad Litem Guardians of Adults Attorney Registration Case Inquiry Form Civil Protection Orders Divorce/Dissolution Forms E-Filing Law Clerk to the Supreme Court of Ohio Marsy's Law and Crime Victim Rights Oral Arguments Archive Reporting to Law Enforcement & Compliance Plan Guidance Resources for the Bench Rules of Practice and Procedure Sign up for Case Notification Statistical Reporting Including Case Time Guidelines Supreme Court of Ohio Writing Manual Trial Court Not Mistaken When Instructing Jury on Self-Defense Drugmaker's Business Tax Linked to Payments Rather Than Products' List Prices Proposed Data Center Regulations for Wilmington Will Not Be on November Ballot Chief Justice Sharon L. Kennedy Delivers Annual State of the Judiciary Appellate Judge Lives Childhood Dream at Supreme Court Lifelong Career Goal Lands Judge on Supreme Court Bench Increased Pay Rate for Death Penalty Defense Approved Longtime Judge and Virtual Self-Help Centers Receive Awards for Excellence and Innovation Seats of Justice: Trumbull County View all News Court of Appeals Courts of Common Pleas, General Division Courts of Common Pleas, Domestic Relations Courts of Common Pleas, Juvenile Courts of Common Pleas, Probate Municipal and County Courts Ohio Supreme Court denies Wilmington data center ballot measure: Wilmington News Journal Ohio Supreme Court Blocks Ballot Measure Targeting $4B AWS Data Center: ENRMidwest Perrigo's Gross Receipts Calculation Upheld in Ohio Tax Case Supreme Court examines ‘chargebacks' in ruling favoring drugmaker Ohio Justices Uphold Perrigo's Tax Method For Ohio Receipts NCAA Eligibility Rules Scrutinized by Ohio Appeals Court Judge: Bloomberg Law Franklin County Municipal Court closed for rest of the week: NBC4 Franklin County Municipal Court closed through Friday due to emergency maintenance: 10TV Chief Justice Sharon L. Kennedy Delivers Annual State of the Judiciary: ▶️ WYFX First News on Fox Chief Justice Sharon L. Kennedy Delivers Annual State of the Judiciary: ▶️ WTRF 7News @ 6am Chief Justice Sharon L. Kennedy Delivers Annual State of the Judiciary: ▶️ WYTV 33 News Daybreak Word files may be viewed for free with Office Online. PDF Files may be viewed, printed, and searched using the Free Acrobat® Reader. Acrobat Reader is a trademark of Adobe Inc.
